Add the migrating futures blog post (#48)
tikv/website: content/blog/client-futures.md

---
title: Migrating the TiKV Rust client from futures 0.1 to 0.3
date: 2019-07-09

> author: Nick Cameron

Reviewer: ```suggestion
author: Nick Cameron, TiKV Contributor
```

Author: I'm not a big fan, do you think it is important?

Reviewer: Nope :) Was just a suggestion!

---

> This article was originally posted at [Featherweight Musings](https://www.ncameron.org/blog/migrating-a-crate-from-futures-0-1-to-0-3/).

Reviewer: If we have this content here that will be what is put into the "Preview" of the index for this article, how do you feel about making it last?

Sometimes the name stayed the same, but the semantics of the function changed slightly (or both!). A common change was taking a closure which returned a future that produces a `T` rather than returning a `T` itself.

Many of the combinator functions moved from the `Future` trait to one of the extension crates. This is an easy issue to fix, but sometimes this fix is hard to deduce from the error message.

## LoopFn

The futures 0.1 library included a `LoopFn` future for handling futures which do something multiple times. It has been removed from futures 0.3, which, I believe, is because a `for` loop in an `async` function or using streams are better solutions in the long term. To make the migration straightforward, I created our own version of the 0.3 `LoopFn` future. This was mostly a copy/paste job with some adjustments (e.g., to handle pinning projection): [code](https://github.com/tikv/client-rust/pull/41/commits/6353dbcfe391d66714686aafab9a49e593259dfb#diff-eeffc045326f81d4c46c22f225d3df90R28). Later I converted several uses of `LoopFn` to use streams, which improved the code somewhat.

## Sink::send_all

> In a few places in the project, we use sinks. I found the migration of these much less easy than for futures. The trickiest issue was that `Sink::send_all` has changed. In 0.1, it took ownership of a stream and once everything is resolved, returned the sink and stream. In 0.3, it takes a mutable reference to the stream and returns nothing. I created our own [compatibility layer](https://github.com/tikv/client-rust/pull/41/commits/6353dbcfe391d66714686aafab9a49e593259dfb#diff-eeffc045326f81d4c46c22f225d3df90R68) to emulate 0.1 sinks with 0.3 futures. This wasn't particularly difficult, but there might be a better way to do this.

Reviewer: Do you think a  short closing sentence with a link to the PR would help wrap up the post?

Async programming in Rust is a large area and has been in development for some time. One of the core parts is the [futures](https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/futures-rs) library. That is a standard Rust library which provides data types and functionality for programming using futures. It is essential for async programming, but not everything you need - you also need libraries for driving the event loop and interacting with the operating system.

Over the years, the futures library has changed a lot. A lot of older code was developed using the 0.1 series of releases and has not been updated. The more recent versions are the 0.3 series (futures-preview on crates.io). The reason for this divergence is that there are a lot of changes between 0.1 and 0.3, 0.1 is fairly stable, whereas 0.3 has been evolving rapidly. Long-term, 0.3 will turn into 1.0; parts of the library are moving into std, and the first parts have recently been stabilised (e.g., the `Future` trait).

> We want the Rust client to work with stable compilers, so we limited the core library to only use features which are stable or would be soon. We did use async/await in our documentation and examples since it is so much more ergonomic, and will eventually be the recommended way to program asynchronously in Rust. As well as avoiding async/await in our library, we also depend on crates which use futures 0.1, which means we needed to use the compatibility layer a lot. Therefore, this might not be a totally typical migration.

Author: ```suggestion
We want the Rust client to work with stable compilers, so we limited the core library to only use features which are stable or which will be soon. We did use async/await in our documentation and examples since it is so much more ergonomic, and will eventually be the recommended way to program asynchronously in Rust. In addition to avoiding async/await in our library, we also depend on crates which use futures 0.1, which means we needed to use the compatibility layer a lot. Therefore, this might not be a totally typical migration.
```

> We want the Rust client to work with stable compilers, so we limited the core library to only use features which are stable or would be soon. We did use async/await in our documentation and examples since it is so much more ergonomic, and will eventually be the recommended way to program asynchronously in Rust. As well as avoiding async/await in our library, we also depend on crates which use futures 0.1, which means we needed to use the compatibility layer a lot. Therefore, this might not be a totally typical migration.

Reviewer 2: 1. A little confused about the shifts of verb tenses in the paragraph. Are we talking about the migration process in the past, or something we'd rather refer to in the generic present?
2. On second thought, I think  "which are stable or will be soon" should be fine.

You can see the whole conversion in [this PR](https://github.com/tikv/client-rust/pull/41).

> I'm not an async expert and I think there might be ways we could make this migration (and the code in general) more idiomatic. If you have suggestions, please let me know on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/nick_r_cameron). If you'd like to contribute a PR, that would be even better! We would love to get more people involved with the [TiKV client](https://github.com/tikv/client-rust).

Author: I think "async" is fine here because it is a colloquial term for a specific kind of programming in Rust, rather than literally "asynchronous programming"

> I'm not an async expert and I think there might be ways we could make this migration (and the code in general) more idiomatic. If you have suggestions, please let me know on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/nick_r_cameron). If you'd like to contribute a PR, that would be even better! We would love to get more people involved with the [TiKV client](https://github.com/tikv/client-rust).

Reviewer 2: sounds fine

## Mechanical changes

These changes are either 'search and replace' changes, or didn't require much thinking.

> The biggest change is that the 0.1 `Future` signature included an `Error` associated type and `poll` always returned a `Result`. In 0.3, the error type has been removed and if you want to handle errors you must do so explicitly. To preserve behaviour, we need to change all occurrences of `Future<Item=Foo, Error=Bar>` to `Future<Output=Result<Foo, Bar>>` (note the name change from `Item` to `Output`). With that change, `poll` returns the same type and so there are no changes required when using futures.

Author: ```suggestion
The biggest change is that the 0.1 `Future` signature included an `Error` associated type and `poll` always returned a `Result`. In 0.3, the error type has been removed; if you want to handle errors, you must do so explicitly. To preserve that output type for futures, we need to change all occurrences of `Future<Item=Foo, Error=Bar>` to `Future<Output=Result<Foo, Bar>>` (note the name change from `Item` to `Output`). With that change, `poll` returns the same type, so there are no changes required when using futures.
```

## Pin

Futures 0.3 makes heavy use of the [`Pin`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/std/pin/index.html) type, in particular for the type of `self` in the signature of `Future::poll`. Other than the mechanical change to signatures, I had to do a bit of juggling using `Pin::get_unchecked_mut` and `Pin::new_unchecked` (both unsafe) to project fields of futures.

Pinning is a subtle and complicated concept. I still don't feel like I have a great grasp of it all. The best reference I'm aware of are the [std::pin docs](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/std/pin/index.html). I'll try and summarise the ideas here (there are some important subtleties that I'm not going to touch on at all, this is not intended to be a tutorial on pinning):

* `Pin` is a type constructor which only makes sense when applied to a pointer type, e.g., `Pin<Box<_>>`.
* `Pin` itself is a marker/wrapper type (a bit like [`NonNull`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/std/ptr/struct.NonNull.html)), not a pointer type. You should read `Pin<Box<Foo>>` as 'a pinned Box pointer to Foo' or 'a Box<Foo> which is guaranteed to be pinned'.

> * If a pointer is pinned, that means that the value pointed to by the pointer will never be moved (moving happens when a non-`Copy` object is passed by value, or via `mem::swap`). Note that the value is allowed to move *before* the pointer is pinned, but not *after*.

Author: ```suggestion
* If a pointer is pinned, it means that the value pointed to by the pointer will never be moved (moving happens when a non-`Copy` object is passed by value, or via `mem::swap`). Note that the value is allowed to be moved *before* the pointer is pinned, but not *after*.
```

"by value" is a term of art which means a value is copied, rather than a reference is copied (which is called "by reference").

> * If a pointer is pinned, that means that the value pointed to by the pointer will never be moved (moving happens when a non-`Copy` object is passed by value, or via `mem::swap`). Note that the value is allowed to move *before* the pointer is pinned, but not *after*.

Reviewer 2: Good to know.

* If a type implements the `Unpin` trait, it means that it never actually matters whether that type is moved or not. I.e., we can safely pretend that a pointer to that type is pinned, even when it is not.
* `Pin` and `Unpin` are not built into the language at all (although some language features indirectly rely on pinning guarantees). Pinning is compiler-enforced without the compiler knowing anything about it. (This is really cool, and is a great demonstration of how powerful Rust's trait system is for this sort of thing). It works like this: `Pin<P<T>>` only permits safe access to `P`, which does not permit moving any value that `P` points to, unless `T` implements `Unpin` (i.e., the programmer has asserted that `T` does not care about being moved). Operations which could allow a non-`Unpin` value to be moved (basically mutable access) is `unsafe`, and it is up to the programmer to not move anything and guarantee that nothing can be moved later in safe code.

> OK, back to the futures migration. Whenever you end up using unsafe methods on `Pin` you have to think about all of the above in order to ensure the pinning invariants. See the [std::pin docs](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/std/pin/index.html) for more on how to reason about this. In many of the places I had to use field projection, the reason is to call `poll` on another future (sometimes indirectly). For that you need a pinned pointer and so you need *structural pinning* (i.e., you project a field of `Pin<&mut T>` to `Pin<&mut FieldType>`).

Author: ```suggestion
OK, back to the futures migration. Whenever you end up using unsafe methods on `Pin`, you have to think about all of the above in order to ensure the pinning invariants. See the [std::pin docs](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/std/pin/index.html) for more details on how to reason about this. In many places, I had to use field projection so that I could call `poll` on another future (sometimes indirectly). To call `poll`, you need a pinned pointer and so you need *structural pinning* (i.e., you project a field of `Pin<&mut T>` to `Pin<&mut FieldType>`).
```
